Has Tornado Alley Shifted or Expanded?

Summary: To provide an analysis on tornado outbreaks across several decades to see if the majority of tornadoes are no longer occurring in Tornado Alley. I am curious to see if Tornado Alley has grown larger or has shifted completely. The more knowledge that can be obtained, the better prepared people can be when severe weather strikes.

Motivation: I have always been fascinated by severe weather. Growing up, my dad and I would watch storms ‘roll in’ from our front porch. It is one of my fondest memories of growing up in TN. Last year, however, I formed a different outlook.  On the night of December 10, 2021, a severe storm system swept through Kentucky producing an EF4 tornado that was on the ground for 165.7 miles. An EF3 tornado was also documented and was on the ground for 122.7 miles. Bowling Green, where I currently reside, was hit that night. While my city was recovering, it was hit again two days later by another, albeit smaller, tornado. I was surprised to learn that nearly 70 out-of-season tornadoes were confirmed by the National Weather Station, or NWS, that night sweeping across ten states. Talking to different residents in the weeks after made me realize how unprepared many of us were. If data could prove that this could continue to happen, maybe more knowledge and preparedness would help to reduce damage and most importantly save lives.

Data Questions: Is Tornado Alley still producing the most tornadoes every year or are more tornadoes being produced elsewhere? Is Tornado Alley shifting or could it be growing larger?

Data Sources: Data will be primarily collected from the Storm Events Database | National Centers for Environmental Information (noaa.gov). This database is a collection of all tornadoes reported by the NWS, government agencies (law enforcement, 911 call centers, etc.), meteorologists, storm chasers, trained spotters, and multiple other types of observers.

Known Issues and Challenges: Due to data collected from multiple sources, there were numerous fields that were entered incorrectly (ex: putting a city in the 'date' column). Data cleaning involved removing incomplete or empty rows, moving incorrect entries to the correct ones, and appending all the files into one csv. Once the data was clean, I was able to further filter and analyze the data.
